---
title:  "A Website is Born!"
read_time: true
category: posts
date: 2017-12-29 10:18 -0700
---

I learned a lot while building this website; I hope to share it so that it might
be helpful for anyone trying to do the same.

The site is built using [Jekyll][1], using the theme [Minimal Mistakes][2]. I
host it on [Github pages][3], and purchased and manage my domain through
[Google Domains][4]. Let's go through the steps in detail.

I'll assume that you have the up-to-date versions of Ruby and Jekyll on your
local machine. I'm going through all this in macOS, which may affect some of the
shell commands I give, but translating to Windows shouldn't be too hard.

## Making a site with Minimal Mistakes

The website for Minimal Mistakes includes a great [quick-start guide][5]; I
recommend the **Starting with `jekyll new`** section as a place to
start. Using this you shoudl be able to establish a base site with some
simple demonstration content.

### Enabling MathJax

In order to enable [MathJax][5], which renders the mathematical equations you see in
my posts, you'll need to edit the file `scripts.html` contained in the folder
`_includes/` to include a line enabling MathJax. However, you'll want to avoid
overwriting the contents of the default `scripts.html`.

So, we need to find where `bundle` is storing the Gem for Minimal Mistakes. To
find this, do 

	bundle show minimal-mistakes-jekyll 

If you just want to navigate directly to that directory, do 

	cd $(bundle show minimal-mistakes-jekyll)
	
Now you can copy the default `scripts.html` into your site:

	cp _includes/scripts.html /path/to/site/_includes/scripts.html
	
Open the copied `scripts.html` in your editor of choice,[^fnote1] and add the
following lines at the end: 

{% highlight html %} 
{% raw %} 
{% if page.mathjax %}
<script type="text/javascript" async
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script> 
{% endif %} 
{% endraw %} 
{% endhighlight %}

And you're done![^fnote2]  Now, you can type `$$x_1$$` to see $$x_1$$, and so
on. The `$$...$$` syntax will generate inline math if used inline, and will
generate a display equation if used on its own line. So, if one enters

	$$ f(a) = \frac{1}{2\pi i} \oint_\gamma \frac{f(z)}{z-a} dz $$

Then the rendered equation appears as so:

$$ f(a) = \frac{1}{2\pi i} \oint_\gamma \frac{f(z)}{z-a} dz $$

### Customize Font Sizes

I found the fonts a bit oversized, so I wanted to change the size for the
posts. In order to do this, you need to copy **the entire folder** which
contains all the relevant scss files. In order to do this, do

	cd $(bundle show minimal-mistakes-jekyll)
	cp -r _sass /path/to/site
	
Now, after much digging through the GitHub issues,[^fnote3] I found that the
file to edit here is `_sass/_reset.scss`. In my site, the relevant chunk of text
looks like

{% highlight html %}
  @include breakpoint($medium) {
    font-size: 13px;
  }

  @include breakpoint($large) {
    font-size: 15px;
  }

  @include breakpoint($x-large) {
    font-size: 18px;
  }
{% endhighlight %}

Once this file has been edited, you should see the font size reduced in your
page. 

## Getting it on GitHub Pages

Okay, now we write a bunch of nonsense, find some beautiful pictures at
[Unsplash][7] to use as headers, and we're ready to publish the thing on GitHub
Pages. I'll first go through as though we don't want to use a custom domain, so
that the website will be exposed at `USERNAME.github.io`. 

### Enabling `jekyll-remote-theme`

First of all, make sure that you're using the `remote-theme` jekyll plugin,
which allows you to use any jekyll theme that is GitHub hosted, rather than only
the few that are officially supported. This process is outlined on the Minimal
Mistakes website, but I'll go through it here.

First, **in your `_config.yml` file**, enable the plugin by including it in the
`plugins` list, via

	plugins:
	  - jekyll-remote-theme

If you have other plugins you want to use (I use `jekyll-feed`), then add them
to this list as well. Designate the `remote_theme` variable, but do so **after
setting the theme**, so that you have in your config file

	theme: "minimal-mistakes-jekyll"
	remote_theme: "mmistakes/minimal-mistakes"

Finally, in your `Gemfile`, add `gem "jekyll-remote-theme"`.

[1]: https://jekyllrb.com/

[2]: https://mmistakes.github.io/minimal-mistakes/

[3]: https://pages.github.com/

[4]: https://domains.google/#/

[5]: https://www.mathjax.org

[6]: http://dasonk.com/blog/2012/10/09/Using-Jekyll-and-Mathjax

[^fnote1]: Presumably emacs.

[^fnote2]: Some [older blog posts][6] discuss the process of adding kramdown as
	the markdown rendering engine, but this is default behavior for Jekyll 3.x,
	so there's no need to do this step.

[^fnote3]: Michael, the guy who built Minimal Mistakes, is really wonderful
    about responding to issues on GitHub, which are really used as a support
    forum for people using the theme who have no experience in web development
    (such as myself).
